---
title: "The Maine Woods"
date: 1864-08-01T01:56:49-00:00
cover: https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3940/15295770929_161350e584_z_d.jpg
cover_alt: ""
cover_caption: "Lakes in Autumn by Sam Whited"
cover_link: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Maine_Woods_(1864)
cover_title: "Taken from the Appalachian Trail in Maine"
cover_width: 640
thumbnail: https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3940/15295770929_161350e584_q_d.jpg
description: >-
               The Maine Woods is one of several excursion books by Henry David
               Thoreau.
               The copy presented here is the first book edition, published in
               the United States in 1864. Two of the sections had previously
               appeared in print: "Ktaadn" was published in The Union Magazine,
               (New York,) in 1848, and "Chesuncook" in the Atlantic Monthly, in
               1858. The final essay was printed for the first time in this 1864
               volume.
excerpt: "By Henry David Thoreau"
nocopy: true
---

## Ktaadn

On the 31st of August, 1846, I left Concord in Massachusetts for Bangor and the
backwoods of Maine, by way of the railroad and steamboat, intending to accompany
a relative of mine engaged in the lumber-trade in Bangor, as far as a dam on the
west branch of the Penobscot, in which property he was interested. From this
place, which is about one hundred miles by the river above Bangor, thirty miles
from the Houlton military road, and five miles beyond the last log-hut, I
proposed to make excursions to Mount Ktaadn, the second highest mountain in New
England, about thirty miles distant, and to some of the lakes of the Penobscot,
either alone or with such company as I might pick up there. It is unusual to
find a camp so far in the woods at that season, when lumbering operations have
ceased, and I was glad to avail myself of the circumstance of a gang of men
being employed there at that time in repairing the injuries caused by the great
freshet in the spring. The mountain may be approached more easily and directly
on horseback and on foot from the northeast side, by the Aroostook road, and the
Wassataquoik River; but in that case you see much less of the wilderness, none
of the glorious river and lake scenery, and have no experience of the batteau
and the boatman's life. I was fortunate also in the season of the year, for in
the summer myriads of black flies, mosquitoes, and midges, or, as the Indians
call them, "no-see-ems," make travelling in the woods almost impossible; but now
their reign was nearly over.

Ktaadn, whose name is an Indian word signifying highest land, was first ascended
by white men in 1804. It was visited by Professor J. W. Bailey of West Point in
1836; by Dr. Charles T. Jackson, the State Geologist, in 1837; and by two young
men from Boston in 1845. All these have given accounts of their expeditions.
Since I was there, two or three other parties have made the excursion, and told
their stories. Besides these, very few, even among backwoodsmen and hunters,
have ever climbed it, and it will be a long time before the tide of fashionable
travel sets that way. The mountainous region of the State of Maine stretches
from near the White Mountains, northeasterly one hundred and sixty miles, to the
head of the Aroostook River, and is about sixty miles wide. The wild or
unsettled portion is far more extensive. So that some hours only of travel in
this direction will carry the curious to the verge of a primitive forest, more
interesting, perhaps, on all accounts, than they would reach by going a thousand
miles westward.

The next forenoon, Tuesday, September 1st, I started with my companion in a
buggy from Bangor for "up river," expecting to be overtaken the next day night
at Mattawamkeag Point, some sixty miles off, by two more Bangoreans, who had
decided to join us in a trip to the mountain. We had each a knapsack or bag
filled with such clothing and articles as were indispensable, and my companion
carried his gun.

Within a dozen miles of Bangor we passed through the villages of Stillwater and
Oldtown, built at the falls of the Penobscot, which furnish the principal power
by which the Maine woods are converted into lumber. The mills are built directly
over and across the river. Here is a close jam, a hard rub, at all seasons; and
then the once green tree, long since white, I need not say as the driven snow,
but as a driven log, becomes lumber merely. Here your inch, your two and your
three inch stuff begin to be, and Mr. Sawyer marks off those spaces which decide
the destiny of so many prostrate forests. Through this steel riddle, more or
less coarse, is the arrowy Maine forest, from Ktaadn and Chesuncook, and the
head-waters of the St. John, relentlessly sifted, till it comes out boards,
clapboards, laths, and shingles such as the wind can take, still perchance to be
slit and slit again, till men get a size that will suit. Think how stood the
white-pine tree on the shore of Chesuncook, its branches soughing with the four
winds, and every individual needle trembling in the sunlight,—think how it
stands with it now,—sold, perchance, to the New England Friction-Match Company!
There were in 1837, as I read, two hundred and fifty saw-mills on the Penobscot
and its tributaries above Bangor, the greater part of them in this immediate
neighborhood, and they sawed two hundred millions of feet of boards annually. To
this is to be added the lumber of the Kennebec, Androscoggin, Saco,
Passamaquoddy, and other streams. No wonder that we hear so often of vessels
which are becalmed off our coast, being surrounded a week at a time by floating
lumber from the Maine woods. The mission of men there seems to be, like so many
busy demons, to drive the forest all out of the country, from every solitary
beaver-swamp and mountain-side, as soon as possible.

At Oldtown we walked into a batteau-manufactory. The making of batteaux is quite
a business here for the supply of the Penobscot River. We examined some on the
stocks. They are light and shapely vessels, calculated for rapid and rocky
streams, and to be carried over long portages on men's shoulders, from twenty to
thirty feet long, and only four or four and a half wide, sharp at both ends like
a canoe, though broadest forward on the bottom, and reaching seven or eight feet
over the water, in order that they may slip over rocks as gently as possible.
They are made very slight, only two boards to a side, commonly secured to a few
light maple or other hard-wood knees, but inward are of the clearest and widest
white-pine stuff, of which there is a great waste on account of their form, for
the bottom is left perfectly flat, not only from side to side, but from end to
end. Sometimes they become "hogging" even, after long use, and the boatmen then
turn them over and straighten them by a weight at each end. They told us that
one wore out in two years, or often in a single trip, on the rocks, and sold for
from fourteen to sixteen dollars. There was something refreshing and wildly
musical to my ears in the very name of the white man's canoe, reminding me of
Charlevoix and Canadian Voyageurs. The batteau is a sort of mongrel between the
canoe and the boat, a fur-trader's boat.

[― More ―](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Maine_Woods_(1864))
